# core-java
core java
JAVA was developed by James Gosling at Sun Microsystems Inc in the year 1995, later acquired by Oracle Corporation. It is a simple programming language. Java makes writing, compiling, and debugging programming easy. It helps to create reusable code and modular programs. Java is a class-based, object-oriented programming language and is designed to have as few implementation dependencies as possible. A general-purpose programming language made for developers to write once run anywhere that is compiled Java code can run on all platforms that support Java. Java applications are compiled to byte code that can run on any Java Virtual Machine. The syntax of Java is similar to c/c++.

Primary/Main Features of Java
1. Platform Independent:  Compiler converts source code to bytecode and then the JVM executes the bytecode generated by the compiler. This bytecode can run on any platform be it Windows, Linux, or macOS which means if we compile a program on Windows, then we can run it on Linux and vice versa. Each operating system has a different JVM, but the output produced by all the OS is the same after the execution of bytecode. That is why we call java a platform-independent language.

2. Object-Oriented Programming Language:  Organizing the program in the terms of collection of objects is a way of object-oriented programming, each of which represents an instance of the class.

The four main concepts of Object-Oriented programming are:

Abstraction
Encapsulation
Inheritance
Polymorphism
3. Simple:  Java is one of the simple languages as it does not have complex features like pointers, operator overloading, multiple inheritances, and Explicit memory allocation. 

4. Robust:  Java language is robust which means reliable. It is developed in such a way that it puts a lot of effort into checking errors as early as possible, that is why the java compiler is able to detect even those errors that are not easy to detect by another programming language. The main features of java that make it robust are garbage collection, Exception Handling, and memory allocation.

5. Secure:  In java, we don’t have pointers, so we cannot access out-of-bound arrays i.e it shows ArrayIndexOutOfBound Exception if we try to do so. That’s why several security flaws like stack corruption or buffer overflow are impossible to exploit in Java. Also java programs run in an environment that is independent of the os(operating system) environment which makes java programs more secure .

6. Distributed:  We can create distributed applications using the java programming language. Remote Method Invocation and Enterprise Java Beans are used for creating distributed applications in java. The java programs can be easily distributed on one or more systems that are connected to each other through an internet connection.

7. Multithreading:  Java supports multithreading. It is a Java feature that allows concurrent execution of two or more parts of a program for maximum utilization of the CPU.

8. Portable:  As we know, java code written on one machine can be run on another machine. The platform-independent feature of java in which its platform-independent bytecode can be taken to any platform for execution makes java portable.

9. High Performance: Java architecture is defined in such a way that it reduces overhead during the runtime and at some time java uses Just In Time (JIT) compiler where the compiler compiles code on-demand basics where it only compiles those methods that are called making applications to execute faster.

10. Dynamic flexibility: Java being completely object-oriented gives us the flexibility to add classes,  new methods to existing classes and even create new classes through sub-classes. Java even supports functions written in other languages such as C, C++ which are referred to as native methods.

11. Sandbox Execution: Java programs run in a separate space that allows user to execute their applications without affecting the underlying system with help of a bytecode verifier. Bytecode verifier also provides additional security as its role is to check the code for any violation of access.

12. Write Once Run Anywhere: As discussed above java application generates a ‘.class’ file which corresponds to our applications(program) but contains code in binary format. It provides ease t architecture-neutral ease as bytecode is not dependent on any machine architecture. It is the primary reason java is used in the enterprising IT industry globally worldwide.

13. Power of compilation and interpretation: Most languages are designed with purpose either they are compiled language or they are interpreted language. But java integrates arising enormous power as Java compiler compiles the source code to bytecode and JVM  executes this bytecode to machine OS-dependent executable code.
